---
layout: post
title: Fayetteville, AR Population Density and Transportation
---

Fayetteville, AR has had massive growth over the past decade. This growth is expected to continue, with estimates putting the population of Washington County at 500,000 by 2050 [[1]](https://www.fayetteville-ar.gov/1216/City-Plan-2040). This rapid growth has caused affordability issues, and has forced the city to rethink the way that it plans expansion.

When cities find themselves needing to expand their housing supply to meet incoming demand, they often will expand outwards. This can cause significant issues with service costs of the new infrastructure and reduced revenue density due to the (more often than not) sparse nature of these new developments. Luckily, local government in Fayetteville has acknowledged these issues, and has put significant efforts into rezoning for higher density developments, and infill projects.

Another massive benefit to the increases of density within the city, is the increased viability of public transportation options. According to Census surveys, only about 1.6% of surveyed people in Fayetteville utilize public transportation to get to work [[2]](https://data.census.gov/table?q=Fayetteville+city,+Arkansas+Transportation+Mode&y=2024). Clearly, public transportation is considered a last case transportation option in its current state, with private vehicle transportation being the preferred option, despite peoples complaints of high traffic.

As the city contends with increased density, there is a clear need to provide better public transportation options, as the reliability on private vehicle travel is entirely unsustainable due to the reliance on private vehicle parking lots which directly contradicts the goals of increasing density within the city.

Currently, Fayetteville is served by two transportation providers, Razorback Transit, and Ozark Regional Transit. Razorback Transit largely operates to move students throughout the city to the University of Arkansas campus. Since of UofA campus is also the cities largest employer, this also has the opportunity to move many people to their workplace. Ozark Regional Transit is a regional transportation provider that serves the larger Northwest Arkansas area, with most of their stops being along the 71B corridor.

When organizing public transportation, it is important that the stops are centered around where people live, and where they want to spend their time. This is why mixed use, dense development, is so condusive to healthy public transit, with every stop having both of these options. While the city is moving in a positive direction with more density and mixed use developments, it is still largely split in commercial areas, and residential areas.

Thinking about these ideas made me curious how many people are actually being served by bus stops in Fayetteville. I initially went to look at Census Tracts for Fayetteville, but these were not granular enough to get accurate numbers for each bus stop.

This led me to start exploring the City of Fayettevilles public Geographic Information System (GIS) resources. I found a GIS layer that contained points that contained the estimated population for that point. There were about 50,000 of these points, roughly laid out on residential buildings in the city.

By directly querying the GIS server, it allowed for returning all the points in a distance around a given point, where you could then calculate the sum of the total estimated population to get a very granular number. This is very tedious to individually, of course, so I made a tool that allows for easy selection of points and visualization!