---
layout: post
title: Fayetteville, AR Population Density and Transportation
---

Fayetteville Arkansas is one of multiple cities in the Northwest Arkansas region that has experienced substantial population growth in recent years. With these population growths, can come serious growing pains in the form of housing costs, transportation difficulties, and tough decisions on how a city should expand. 

I have recently become interested in these questions, and found that population density and the urban environment are very closely related. As cities grow, they often will expand outwards, in the familiar pattern of suburban sprawl. With this pattern comes big-box stores, strip malls, endless seas of parking lots, and high-speed transportation roads that also serve as destinations (maybe you have heard of these referred to as "Stroads").

One overlooked symptom of the current urban design is the pressure that this can put on city budgets. Because of the current property tax structures, parking lots are taxed much less than the actual value that the land is worth. So as cities expand outwards, and the cities liability for maintenance costs of streets, sewer lines, and other ameneties increases, cities are collect less revenue than a business with more density, and less reliance on urban sprawl.

Another benefit of more dense city development, is the opportunity for different transit modes. If you imagine your standard single family home neighborhood, the vast majority of people use their personal car as transportation. Now think of cities that have things like subways, and bus highly used bus systems. These places are almost always places with high density. That is because when there is high density, each bus stop can serve many more people within a walkable radius 